Add TIP-1072 backed token convertibility draft (#5263)
tempoxyz/tempo: tips/tip-1072.md

---
id: TIP-1072
title: TIP-20 Backed Token Convertibility
description: Enshrines same-backing TIP-20 conversion through a native conversion precompile.
authors: Dan Robinson
status: Draft
related: TIP-20, TIP-403, TIP-1015
protocolVersion: TBD
---

# TIP-1072: TIP-20 Backed Token Convertibility

## Abstract

This TIP adds native convertibility between TIP-20 tokens that share the same backing token. A TIP-20 token may declare a single backing token, and the protocol maintains the invariant that the backed token's total supply equals the backing token balance held by the backed token contract.

Conversion is executed by a native conversion precompile. It transfers the user's source token into the precompile, burns the source token, transfers backing from the source token contract to the destination token contract, and mints the destination token atomically.

## Motivation

Tempo stablecoins can represent issuer-specific wrappers over the same underlying reserve asset. Users and applications should be able to convert between those wrappers at exact par when both wrappers are backed by the same TIP-20 token, without relying on DEX liquidity, spreads, or issuer-posted orders.

> Enshrining this as a token/backing primitive gives wallets, applications, and DEX routing a deterministic conversion edge. It also keeps issuer control explicit: a holder of the destination token's `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` controls who may convert into that token, and the shared backing token's existing TIP-403 transfer policy controls whether backing may move between wrapper contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enshrining this as a token/backing primitive allows this kind of convertibility to be legible to wallets, applications, and DEX routing. It also gives issuers easy control over how convertibility can be used: a holder of the destination token's `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` controls who may convert into that token, and the shared backing token's existing TIP-403 transfer policy controls whether backing may move between wrapper contracts.
```

- **Backing token admin.** Holders of the backing token's `DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE` control the backing token's transfer policy and can allow or block backing movement between wrapper contracts.
- **Users.** Users may attempt to convert through paused tokens, unbacked tokens, blocked policies, or tokens that no longer share backing. These attempts MUST revert.
- **Conversion precompile.** The precompile is trusted protocol code. It can mint destination tokens for conversion without an explicit issuer grant, but only after all backing, pause, and policy checks pass.

---

# Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## TIP-20 Backing State

Each TIP-20 token has an optional singular backing token:

```solidity
address backingToken;
```

> `backingToken == address(0)` means the token is not backed for purposes of this TIP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`backingToken == address(0)` means the token is not backed onchain, for purposes of this TIP.
```

A token MUST NOT set itself as its backing token. Backing relationships MUST NOT contain cycles. For example, if `A.backingToken = B` and `B.backingToken = C`, then `C.backingToken` MUST NOT be `A`.

### Backing Administration

Backing administration is restricted to callers for which `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token.

`addBackingToken(backingToken)` MUST fail unless `backingToken` is currently unset, `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token, `backingToken` is a nonzero TIP-20 token address, and setting it would not create a backing cycle.

`removeBackingToken()` MUST fail unless `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token, `backingToken` is currently set, and `totalSupply() == 0`.

> If `totalSupply() > 0` when `backingToken` is initially set, `addBackingToken(backingToken)` MUST transfer exactly `totalSupply()` units of the backing token from the caller to the backed token contract. The operation MUST revert if that caller cannot provide exactly that backing amount or if the backing token's TIP-403 policy rejects the transfer.

Reviewer: I think should specify that these contracts are implicitly approved, and this transfer does not affect approvals. Wherever in the doc we talk about mints transferring tokens from the caller as part of a mint(), it should specify that too.

    error BackingCycle();
    error BackingNotSet();
    error LiveSupply();
    error UnauthorizedAdmin();

    event BackingTokenAdded(address indexed token, address indexed backingToken);
    event BackingTokenRemoved(address indexed token, address indexed backingToken);

    /// @notice Adds a backing token for this TIP-20 token.
    /// @dev Callable only when this token's `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true.
    /// Reverts if a backing token is
    /// already set, if `backingToken` is this token, or if the relationship
    /// would create a backing cycle.
    function addBackingToken(address backingToken) external;

    /// @notice Removes this token's backing token.
    /// @dev Callable only when this token's `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true.
    /// Reverts unless totalSupply() == 0.
    function removeBackingToken() external;
}
```

### Backed Supply Invariant

For any TIP-20 token `T` with `T.backingToken = R != address(0)`, the following invariant MUST hold:

```text
T.totalSupply() == R.balanceOf(address(T))
```

Implementations MUST preserve this invariant across mint, burn, backing setup, and conversion.

> For backed tokens, `mint` and `mintWithMemo` MUST transfer exactly the minted amount of the backing token from the issuer calling the mint function to the backed token contract in the same atomic operation. This backing transfer MUST use the backing token's normal `transferFrom` path, including allowance and TIP-403 checks. Ordinary burning MUST decrease the token's backing balance by the burned amount in the same atomic operation, or MUST be disallowed unless another protocol rule maintains the invariant.

Reviewer: What does "or MUST be disallowed unless another protocol rule maintains the invariant" mean"? Unless there's a specific one considered in this TIP, just disallow it.

Reviewer: And let's make the contract implicitly approved, so it doesn't require allowance checks. But does require TIP-403.

The conversion precompile is the exception to the backed mint transfer-from rule. When conversion mints destination tokens, the precompile first transfers backing from the source token contract to the destination token contract, then mints the destination token to `recipient`. It does not need an allowance from the DEX or swap user for the destination token's backing transfer.

More generally, for any TIP-20 token contract `T` and any other TIP-20 token `R`, the following invariant MUST hold:

```text
R.balanceOf(address(T)) == 0, unless T.backingToken == R
R.balanceOf(address(T)) == T.totalSupply(), if T.backingToken == R
```

> This invariant is preserved because ordinary transfers to TIP-20 contract addresses are disallowed, and the protocol-defined exceptions only credit a TIP-20 contract address when that contract is backed by the credited token. Initial backing setup credits `address(T)` with exactly `T.totalSupply()` units of `R`. Conversion moves backing from one backed token contract to another backed token contract that shares the same immediate backing token, while burning the source wrapper and minting the destination wrapper by the same amount.

Reviewer: Maybe could mention as an aside that due to the separate mechanism for rewards, tokens can hold their own balance

    /// @param policyId TIP-403 policy ID checked against the converting user.
    /// @dev Callable only when `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true.
    /// `policyId` MUST exist in the TIP-403 registry. Policy ID 0 is the
    /// built-in always-reject policy; policy ID 1 is the built-in always-allow policy.
    /// Use `clearConversionPolicy` to make policy absence explicit.
    function setConversionPolicy(address token, uint64 policyId) external;

    /// @notice Clears the conversion policy for `token`.
    /// @param token Destination TIP-20 token whose inbound conversion policy is cleared.
    /// @dev Callable only when `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true. After clearing, conversion into
    /// `token` MUST revert with `ConversionPolicyNotSet`.
    function clearConversionPolicy(address token) external;

    /// @notice Returns whether `token` has a configured conversion policy.
    function hasConversionPolicy(address token) external view returns (bool);

    /// @notice Returns the TIP-403 policy ID used for conversion into `token`.
    /// @dev Reverts with `ConversionPolicyNotSet` if no policy is configured.

>     function conversionPolicy(address token) external view returns (uint64 policyId);

Reviewer: Can we make it two policies: conversionInPolicy, conversionOutPolicy?

    /// @param recipient Address that receives minted destination tokens.
    /// @param policySubject User address checked against the destination
    /// conversion policy.
    /// @dev Reverts unless both tokens have the same nonzero immediate backing
    /// token, all three immediate tokens are unpaused, and the destination
    /// conversion policy authorizes `policySubject`.
    function convert(
        address sourceToken,
        address destinationToken,
        uint256 amount,
        address recipient,
        address policySubject
    ) external;
}
```

### Conversion Policy

The conversion precompile stores conversion policy per destination token:

```solidity
mapping(address token => uint64 policyId) conversionPolicy;
mapping(address token => bool configured) hasConversionPolicy;
```

Conversion policy administration is restricted to callers for which `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true. `setConversionPolicy(token, policyId)` MUST revert unless `policyId` exists in the TIP-403 registry. Built-in policy IDs `0` and `1` are valid configured policies: `0` is always-reject, and `1` is always-allow.

> The conversion policy is a TIP-403 policy reference. During conversion into `destinationToken`, the precompile MUST check the policy against `policySubject`, not against the conversion precompile address, DEX, router, or `recipient`. The precompile MUST require both of the following checks to pass:

Reviewer: Can we just make this `isAuthorized`?

---
id: TIP-1072
title: TIP-20 Backed Token Convertibility
description: Enshrines same-backing TIP-20 conversion through a native conversion precompile.
authors: Dan Robinson
status: Draft

> related: TIP-20, TIP-403, TIP-1015

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
related: TIP-20, TIP-403, TIP-1015, TIP-1028
```
any TIP-1028 considerations?

- **Users.** Users may attempt to convert through paused tokens, unbacked tokens, blocked policies, or tokens that no longer share backing. These attempts MUST revert.
- **Conversion precompile.** The precompile is trusted protocol code. It can mint destination tokens for conversion without an explicit issuer grant, but only after all backing, pause, and policy checks pass.

---

# Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## TIP-20 Backing State

Each TIP-20 token has an optional singular backing token:

```solidity
address backingToken;
```

`backingToken == address(0)` means the token is not backed onchain, for purposes of this TIP.

A token MUST NOT set itself as its backing token. Backing relationships MUST NOT contain cycles. For example, if `A.backingToken = B` and `B.backingToken = C`, then `C.backingToken` MUST NOT be `A`.

### Backing Administration

Backing administration is restricted to callers for which `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token.

> `addBackingToken(backingToken)` MUST fail unless `backingToken` is currently unset, `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token, `backingToken` is a nonzero TIP-20 token address, and setting it would not create a backing cycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`addBackingToken(backingToken)` MUST fail unless `backingToken` is currently unset, `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true on the backed token, `backingToken` is a deployed (`EXTCODESIZE != 0`), TIP-20 token address, and setting it would not create a backing cycle.
```

    error BackingCycle();
    error BackingNotSet();
    error LiveSupply();
    error UnauthorizedAdmin();

    event BackingTokenAdded(address indexed token, address indexed backingToken);
    event BackingTokenRemoved(address indexed token, address indexed backingToken);

    /// @notice Adds a backing token for this TIP-20 token.
    /// @dev Callable only when this token's `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true.
    /// Reverts if a backing token is
    /// already set, if `backingToken` is this token, or if the relationship
    /// would create a backing cycle.
    function addBackingToken(address backingToken) external;

    /// @notice Removes this token's backing token.
    /// @dev Callable only when this token's `hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true.
    /// Reverts unless totalSupply() == 0.
    function removeBackingToken() external;
}
```

### Backed Supply Invariant

For any TIP-20 token `T` with `T.backingToken = R != address(0)`, the following invariant MUST hold:

```text
T.totalSupply() == R.balanceOf(address(T))
```

Implementations MUST preserve this invariant across mint, burn, backing setup, and conversion.

> For backed tokens, `mint` and `mintWithMemo` MUST transfer exactly the minted amount of the backing token from the issuer calling the mint function to the backed token contract in the same atomic operation. The backed token contract is implicitly approved for this backing transfer, the transfer MUST NOT require or consume any allowance from the issuer, and the transfer MUST still satisfy the backing token's TIP-403 policy. Ordinary burning MUST decrease the token's backing balance by the burned amount in the same atomic operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For backed tokens, `mint` and `mintWithMemo` MUST transfer exactly the minted amount of the backing token from the issuer calling the mint function to the backed token contract in the same atomic operation. The backed token contract is implicitly approved for this backing transfer, the transfer MUST NOT require or consume any allowance from the issuer, and the transfer MUST still satisfy the backing token's TIP-403 policy. `burn` and `burnBlocked` MUST decrease the token's backing balance by the burned amount in the same atomic operation.
```

    /// @param recipient Address that receives minted destination tokens.
    /// @param policySubject User address checked as the converting actor
    /// against the conversion-in and conversion-out policies. For direct user
    /// calls this is normally `msg.sender`; DEX autorouting uses the swap user.
    /// @dev Reverts unless both tokens have the same nonzero immediate backing
    /// token, all three immediate tokens are unpaused, and the destination
    /// conversion-in and conversion-out policies authorize `policySubject`,
    /// and the destination conversion-in policy authorizes `recipient`.
    function convert(
        address sourceToken,
        address destinationToken,
        uint256 amount,
        address recipient,
        address policySubject
    ) external;
}
```

### Conversion Policy

The conversion precompile stores separate conversion-in and conversion-out policies per token:

```solidity
mapping(address token => uint64 policyId) conversionInPolicy;
mapping(address token => bool configured) hasConversionInPolicy;
mapping(address token => uint64 policyId) conversionOutPolicy;
mapping(address token => bool configured) hasConversionOutPolicy;
```

> Conversion policy administration is restricted to callers for which `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true. `setConversionInPolicy(token, policyId)` and `setConversionOutPolicy(token, policyId)` MUST revert unless `policyId` exists in the TIP-403 registry. Built-in policy IDs `0` and `1` are valid configured policies: `0` is always-reject, and `1` is always-allow.

Reviewer 2: instead of "`token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true." everywhere just say "has the admin role/is authorized"?

> Conversion policy administration is restricted to callers for which `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true. `setConversionInPolicy(token, policyId)` and `setConversionOutPolicy(token, policyId)` MUST revert unless `policyId` exists in the TIP-403 registry. Built-in policy IDs `0` and `1` are valid configured policies: `0` is always-reject, and `1` is always-allow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conversion policy administration is restricted to callers for which `token.hasRole(DEFAULT_ADMIN_ROLE, msg.sender)` is true. `setConversionInPolicy(token, policyId)` and `setConversionOutPolicy(token, policyId)` MUST revert if `policyId` does not exist in the TIP-403 registry. Built-in policy IDs `0` and `1` are valid configured policies: `0` is always-reject, and `1` is always-allow.
```
